---
title: Why AI hasn't transformed CAD
slug: why-AI-hasnt-transformed-CAD
order: 12
---

## Why AI hasn't transformed CAD

### The transformer revolution mostly skipped CAD. The reason, once again, is b-rep.

AI is disrupting many different industries, yet it seems like the applications of the transformer revolution is relatively limited in the CAD industry. While there are definitely a few interesting applications, like Shapr3D’s generative render, Colab Software’s AI review and SimScale’s AI based simulations, we haven’t seen a shift happening in the core CAD workflows, there is still no “design me a thing” text to CAD tool that actually works beyond a box with three holes.

Why is that?

You guessed right. It’s b-reps. Once again, boundary representation is the party pooper. There are a couple of issues: technological and conceptual.

The technological issue: b-reps are fundamentally irregular, topological, and continuous, whereas standard transformers are inherently designed for structured, sequential, and discrete data. So the kind of data that transformers like, and b-reps are fundamentally different.

But if we can’t generate b-reps directly, why don’t we generate the parametric history? A parametric history is basically code, and LLMs are really good at generating code. Why don’t we use the same technique to generate feature trees? Actually we can - but it will be very limited. We’ll run into the same issue: certain parts of the feature tree will reference edges and faces, like a fillet command. These references are not part of the code, but the result of the execution of the code! So the LLM would need to understand at the time of the generation of the code the topological structure of the geometry that is generated by the code, which is not possible without actually evaluating the feature tree using a b-rep kernel.

Bummer!

But there is another one, a conceptual issue: natural language sucks at describing geometry. Imagine the following: you take a complex part, and you write a detailed description of the part with natural language. Now hand over that description to 10 different designers - you’ll most likely get 10 different designs. That’s simply because natural language is not very good at describing geometry.

I think there are a few things we need to fix to make the current AI technology stack more useful in the core CAD modeling workflow:

---

1. We need a better representation than b-reps. I wrote a lot about this before, but with b-reps we’ll always have the robustness and structural problems. Is there a representation that is more AI friendly? More robust? We need that for AI.
2. We need faster simulations.

---

Why? Because probably the future of CAD workflows + AI is not generating geometry from text, but generating geometry from text *and* geometry! Basically the initial geometry is created by the user, and enriched by text - making the initial geometry part of the prompt, doing a more sophisticated topology optimization than what current topology optimization techniques can do. That would solve the "natural language is bad at describing geometry" issue. But - we are not there yet. First, we need something better than b-reps.

